README.md, before:

# Single-Cell Variant Calling Pipeline

This repository contains a modular pipeline for variant calling on single-cell RNA-seq data, using Cell Ranger, a Python-based BAM splitting tool, and [cellsnp-lite](https://github.com/single-cell-genetics/cellsnp-lite).

## Features

- Compatible with 10x Genomics (Cell Ranger) or Drop-seq BAMs.
- Automatically splits pooled BAM into per-cell BAMs.
- Efficient SNP/variant calling per cell using cellsnp-lite.
- User-friendly: prompts for inputs, no hardcoded personal paths.

## Requirements

- [Cell Ranger](https://support.10xgenomics.com/)
- Python 3.6+ with `pysam`
- [samtools](http://www.htslib.org/)
- [cellsnp-lite](https://github.com/single-cell-genetics/cellsnp-lite)
- Unix/Linux shell

## Usage

### 1. Process FASTQ with Cell Ranger

Generate a barcoded, coordinate-sorted BAM file:

```bash
cellranger count \
  --id=YOUR_SAMPLE_ID \
  --transcriptome=/path/to/reference \
  --fastqs=/path/to/fastqs \
  --sample=YOUR_SAMPLE_NAME
```

---

### 2. Split BAM by Cell Barcode

Run the provided Python script:

```bash
python splitbam.py
```

The script will prompt for:
- Path to input BAM (e.g., Cell Ranger’s `possorted_genome_bam.bam`)
- Output directory for per-cell BAMs
- Barcode tag (`CB` for 10x, `XC` for Drop-seq)
- Minimum reads per barcode to keep

---

### 3. Run the Variant Calling Pipeline

Run the bash pipeline:

```bash
bash bam2snp.sh
```

The script will prompt for:
- Sample name (for output labeling)
- Path to the input BAM
- Output directories for per-cell BAMs and SNP results
- Barcode tag (CB/XC)
- Minimum reads per cell
- Reference SNP VCF (e.g., dbSNP)

---

### 4. Results

Variant calls per cell will be in the specified output directory.

---

## Notes

- Indexing of per-cell BAMs is automatic.
- Intermediate files (e.g., list files) are cleaned up at the end of the run.
- To save storage, you can optionally delete per-cell BAMs after variant calling.

---

## Citing Tools

Please cite:
- [Cell Ranger](https://support.10xgenomics.com/)
- [samtools](http://www.htslib.org/)
- [cellsnp-lite](https://github.com/single-cell-genetics/cellsnp-lite)
- [pysam](https://github.com/pysam-developers/pysam)

---

## License

See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for terms.

---

## Contact

For questions, open a GitHub issue or contact the repository maintainer.

Commit message:

Update README with improved instructions

README.md, after:

# Single-Cell Variant Calling Pipeline

This repository contains a modular pipeline for variant calling on single-cell RNA-seq data, using Cell Ranger, a Python-based BAM splitting tool, and [cellsnp-lite](https://github.com/single-cell-genetics/cellsnp-lite).

## Features

- Compatible with 10x Genomics (Cell Ranger) or Drop-seq BAMs.
- Automatically splits pooled BAM into per-cell BAMs.
- Efficient SNP/variant calling per cell using cellsnp-lite.
- User-friendly: prompts for inputs, no hardcoded personal paths.

## Requirements

- [Cell Ranger](https://support.10xgenomics.com/)
- Python 3.6+ with `pysam`
- [samtools](http://www.htslib.org/)
- [cellsnp-lite](https://github.com/single-cell-genetics/cellsnp-lite)
- Unix/Linux shell

## Usage

### 1. Process FASTQ with Cell Ranger

Generate a barcoded, coordinate-sorted BAM file:

```bash
cellranger count \
  --id=YOUR_SAMPLE_ID \
  --transcriptome=/path/to/reference \
  --fastqs=/path/to/fastqs \
  --sample=YOUR_SAMPLE_NAME
```

---

### 2. Run the Split BAM by Cell Barcode & Variant Calling Pipeline

Run the bash pipeline:

```bash
bash bam2snp.sh
```

The first part of the pipeline contains the script that split bam by cell barcode

```bash
python splitbam.py
```
The script will prompt for:
- Sample name (for output labeling)
- Path to input BAM (e.g., Cell Ranger’s `possorted_genome_bam.bam`)
- Barcode tag (`CB` for 10x, `XC` for Drop-seq)
- Minimum reads per barcode to keep

---
The second half picks up the output of bamsplit.py and perform variant calling with cellsnp-lite

The script will prompt for:
- Output directories for per-cell BAMs and SNP results
- Reference SNP VCF (e.g., dbSNP)

---

### 4. Results

Variant calls per cell will be in the specified output directory and ready for downstream analysis.

---

## Notes

- Indexing of per-cell BAMs is automatic.
- Intermediate files (e.g., list files) are cleaned up at the end of the run.
- To save storage, you can optionally delete per-cell BAMs after variant calling.

---

## Citing Tools

Please cite:
- [Cell Ranger](https://support.10xgenomics.com/)
- [samtools](http://www.htslib.org/)
- [cellsnp-lite](https://github.com/single-cell-genetics/cellsnp-lite)
- [pysam](https://github.com/pysam-developers/pysam)

---

## License

See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for terms.

---

## Contact

For questions, open a GitHub issue or contact the repository maintainer.
